>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, DECEMBER 6: AN
AMERICAN PHOTOJOURNALIST AND A
SOUTH AFRICAN AID WORKER HELD
CAPTIVE BY AL QAEDA IN YEMEN DIE
DURING A U.S. RESCUE MISSION.
ALSO, EXAMINING A FRAGMENTED
SYSTEM: ARE KILLINGS BY POLICE
BEING UNDERCOUNTED?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
PREPARING FOR THE INEVITABLE:
ESTATE PLANNING FOR YOUR ONLINE
LIFE.
>> THE YEAR AFTER SOMEBODY
PASSES IS ONE OF THE MOST
VULNERABLE TIMES FOR IDENITY
THEFT.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AN AMERICAN HOSTAGE HAS BEEN
KILLED IN A FAILED RESCUE
ATTEMPT IN YEMEN.
33-YEAR-OLD PHOTOJOURNALIST LUKE
SOMERS HAD BEEN HELD BY AL QAEDA
MILITANTS FOR NEARLY A YEAR.
THE GROUP RECENTLY ISSUED A
VIDEOTAPE, THREATENING HIS LIFE.
SOMERS WAS FATALLY SHOT BY HIS
CAPTORS LAST NIGHT WHEN U.S.
SPECIAL FORCES LAUNCHED THE RAID
ON A VILLAGE IN THE SOUTHERN
PROVINCE OF SHABWA.
HE DIED FROM THOSE WOUNDS.
ONE LOCAL TRIBAL LEADER SAID
COMMANDOS LANDED IN HELICOPTERS,
DEPLOYED CONCUSSION GRENADES AND
STORMED FOUR DIFFERENT HOUSES.
A SOUTH AFRICAN CAPTIVE WAS ALSO
KILLED IN THE SIEGE.
IN A STATEMENT, PRESIDENT OBAMA
EXPRESSED HIS SYMPATHY FOR
SOMER'S FAMILY.
"THE UNITED STATES WILL SPARE NO
EFFORT TO USE ALL OF ITS
MILITARY, INTELLIGENCE AND
DIPLOMATIC CAPABILITIES TO
BRING AMERICANS HOME SAFELY."
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
BAHRAIN IS "NEW YORK TIMES"
REPORTER ERIC SCHMITT.
SO, ERIC, WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT
THE DETAILS OF THIS OPERATION?
>> WELL, OVERNIGHT FRIDAY,
EARLY MORNING IN YEMEN, ABOUT
THREE DOZEN SPECIAL OPERATIONS
FORCES, INCLUDING NAVY SEAL
TEAM 6, SWEPT INTO A SMALL
VILLAGE IN SOUTHERN YEMEN WITH
THE OBJECT OF TRYING TO FREE
LUKE SOMERS, THE AMERICAN
PHOTOJOURNALIST WHO WAS HELD
HOSTAGE THERE.
THEY CAME IN ON OSPREY
HELICOPTER, OSPREY AIRCRAFT, AND
APPROACHED ON FOOT TO A WALLED
COMPOUND AND GOT TO WITHIN 100
YARDS OF THE COMPOUND WHEN
SOMEHOW THEY WERE DETECTED BY
THE ARMED GUNMEN INSIDE WHO WERE
HOLDING THE HOSTAGES.
A GUN BATTLE BROKE OUT.
AND BEFORE THE COMMANDOS COULD
GET INSIDE THE COMPOUND, BOTH
HOSTAGES HAD BEEN SHOT AS THE
MILITANTS FLED.
THE COMMANDOS HURRIED TO GET
BOTH HOSTAGES-- LUKE SOMERS AND
A SOUTH AFRICAN-- ABOARD THE
AIRCRAFT AND OUT TO THE NAVY
SHIP WHICH HAD LAUNCHED THE
MISSION.
UNFORTUNATELY, ONE OF THE
HOSTAGES DIED EN ROUTE.
THE OTHER DIED ON THE SHIP
ITSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS
WASN'T THE FIRST TIME THAT WE'VE
TRIED TO RESCUE MR. SOMERS,
RIGHT?
>> NO, JUST A LITTLE LESS THAN
TWO WEEKS AGO WHEN ANOTHER
SPECIAL OPERATIONS TEAM ALSO
CONDUCTED A RAID ON WHAT THEY
BELIEVED TO BE A SITE HOLDING
HOSTAGES, AND THEY DID RESCUE
ABOUT EIGHT OTHER HOSTAGES,
INCLUDING SEVERAL YEMENIS, BUT
MR. SOMERS HAD BEEN MOVED WITH
THREE OR FOUR OTHER WESTERNERS.
AND SO THIS WAS A FOLLOW-UP
EFFORT TO TRY AND RESCUE THEM
BEFORE A DEADLINE IMPOSED BY THE
AL QAEDA AFFILIATE IN YEMEN
EXPIRED ON SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WERE THERE ANY
OTHER INJURIES, ANY MEMBERS OF
THE U.S. SPECIAL FORCES THAT
WERE INJURED OR CIVILIANS ON
THE GROUND OR THE PEOPLE WHO
WERE HOLDING HIM HOSTAGE?
>> THERE HAVE BEEN SOME MEDIA
REPORTS OF CIVILIAN CASUALTIES,
BUT I HAVE NOT YET BEEN ABLE TO
CONFIRM THAT.
THERE WERE NO MILITARY
CASUALTIES AS PART OF THIS TEAM.
IT'S A DANGEROUS PART, A REMOTE
PART OF SOUTHERN YEMEN, OF
COURSE, THAT THE AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE THERE HAS CONTROLLED
FOR SOME TIME NOW, SO THIS IS A
VERY DANGEROUS, HIGH-RISK
MISSION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS IS A
JOINT OPERATION BETWEEN U.S.
FORCES AND YEMENI FORCES.
HOW HAS THAT BEEN GOING OVER THE
PAST YEAR OR TWO YEARS AS THESE
GOVERNMENTS HAVE BEEN TRYING TO
WORK TOGETHER?
>> WELL, THE GOVERNMENT IN
YEMEN, UNDER PRESIDENT HADI,
HAS BEEN A VERY EFFECTIVE
PARTNER IN THE COUNTERTERRORISM
FIELD.
THE U.S. HAS HAD TRAINERS INSIDE
OF YEMEN, TRAINING SOME OF THEIR
COUNTERTERRORISM AND SPECIAL
OPERATIONS FORCES, AND THERE
WERE A FEW YEMENI COUNTER-
TERRORISM SPECIALISTS ONBOARD
THIS MISSION, BUT IT WAS
PRIMARILY A U.S. OPERATION TO
RESCUE THE AMERICAN AND ANYBODY
ELSE THEY COULD FIND IN THIS
COMPOUND.
>> Sreenivasan: EVERYONE IN
THE UNITED STATES RECOGNIZES AND
REMEMBERS IN 2011 THE SUCCESSFUL
OPERATION TO KILL OSAMA BIN
LADEN, TO CAPTURE OR KILL OSAMA
BIN LADEN, BUT SINCE THEN, AT
LEAST IN THE RECENT PAST, THERE
HAVE BEEN A COUPLE OF FAILURES
AS WELL, HIGHLIGHTING HOW
DIFFICULT AND DANGEROUS THESE
ARE.
>> EXACTLY.
IT UNDERSCORES THE FRAGILITY OF
THE INTELLIGENCE THAT THESE
SPECIAL OPERATIONS OFFICERS
HAVE TO USE WHEN THEY GO IN.
IN THIS CASE, THEY WERE UNDER
SOME TIME PRESSURES.
THEY KNEW THE HOSTAGES WERE
THREATENED WITH DEATH BY THE
END OF SATURDAY-- OR AT LEAST
THE AMERICAN HOSTAGE WAS.
BECAUSE OF THE PREVIOUS RAID
JUST A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO,
THE MILITANTS KNEW THAT THE
AMERICANS MIGHT BE COMING AGAIN.
AND SO THE ELEMENT OF SURPRISE
WAS GOING TO BE VERY DIFFICULT
TO ACHIEVE IN A MISSION LIKE
THIS.
AND I THINK YOU'RE RIGHT, IT
DOES UNDERSCORE THE LIMITATIONS
OF MILITARY FORCE IN TRYING TO
RESCUE CAPTURED CITIZENS LIKE
MR. SOMERS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, ERIC
SCHMITT OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES"
REPORTING FOR US FROM BAHRAIN
VIA SKYPE.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER TODAY, I
SPOKE WITH THE NEWSHOUR'S TIK
ROOT, WHO WORKED WITH LUKE
SOMERS IN YEMEN.
>> WHEN HE WAS KIDNAPPED IN
SEPTEMBER 2013, IT REALLY HIT
HOME WITH A LOT OF US.
HE WAS KIDNAPPED FROM IN FRONT
OF A SUPERMARKET THAT WE ALL
SHOPPED AT AT A TIME OF DAY WHEN
WE WOULD HAVE... COULD HAVE GONE
THERE.
AND HE WAS DOING NOTHING OUT OF
THE ORDINARY.
I THINK WE... WE WERE VERY MUCH
AWARE THAT, YOU KNOW, IT COULD
HAVE BEEN ANY ONE OF US.
>> Sreenivasan: TO SEE MY
ENTIRE CONVERSATION WITH TIK
ROOT, VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
MEANWHILE, A RAID IN NORTH-
WESTERN PAKISTAN REPORTEDLY
SUCCEEDED IN KILLING A SENIOR AL
QAEDA MILITANT.
PAKISTAN SAYS ITS TROOPS KILLED
ADNAN EL SHUKRIJUMAH NEAR THE
AFGHAN BORDER THIS MORNING.
THE F.B.I. SUSPECTED HIM OF
BEING ONE OF THE LEADERS OF "AL
QAEDA'S EXTERNAL OPERATIONS
PROGRAM."
HE WAS ACCUSED OF PLOTTING TO
BOMB TRAINS IN NEW YORK AND
LONDON IN 2009.
PAKISTAN SAYS TWO OTHER
MILITANTS WERE ALSO KILLED IN
THE RAID, AS WAS A PAKISTANI
SOLDIER.
OUTGOING DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK
HAGEL SAYS THE U.S. WILL KEEP A
LARGER FORCE IN AFGHANISTAN THAN
IT ORIGINALLY PLANNED.
HAGEL ANNOUNCED IN KABUL TODAY
THAT UP TO 10,800 TROOPS WILL
REMAIN IN AFGHANISTAN AT THE
BEGINNING OF NEXT YEAR.
THAT'S 1,000 MORE TROOPS THAN
THE DEFENSE DEPARTMENT INITIALLY
ANNOUNCED.
KABUL'S SEEN AN UPTICK IN
TALIBAN ATTACKS OVER THE LAST
FEW WEEKS.
SECRETARY HAGEL SAYS THE
VIOLENCE WAS PREDICTABLE SINCE
MILITANTS ARE TRYING TO DISRUPT
AFGHANISTAN'S NEW GOVERNMENT,
LED BY PRESIDENT GHANI.
AND IN THE PHILIPPINES, MORE
THAN 650,000 PEOPLE EVACUATED
FROM COASTAL VILLAGES JUST AS
TYPHOON HAGUPIT MADE LANDFALL
THIS MORNING.
THE STORM WEAKENED BEFORE
HITTING THE EASTERN COAST, BUT
GUSTS WERE STILL PEAKING AT 120
MILES PER HOUR.
THE TYPHOON HAS KNOCKED OUT
POWER, DOWNED TREES AND
CANCELLED MORE THAN 150 FLIGHTS
SINCE YESTERDAY.
AND A GRIM STATISTIC IN THE
FIGHT AGAINST EBOLA IN WEST
AFRICA-- THE VIRUS HAS CLAIMED
THE LIVES OF TWO MORE DOCTORS IN
SIERRA LEONE.
THAT BRINGS THE TOTAL TO AT
LEAST NINE DOCTORS KILLED IN
THAT COUNTRY SINCE THE OUTBREAK
BEGAN.
THE NUMBER IS SIGNIFICANT
BECAUSE, OF THE THREE MOST
AFFECTED COUNTRIES, SIERRA LEONE
HAS THE HIGHEST HEALTHCARE
WORKER FATALITY RATE.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
REPORTS AT LEAST 77% OF
HEALTHCARE WORKERS WHO
CONTRACTED EBOLA IN SIERRA LEONE
HAVE DIED.
ACROSS ALL OF WEST AFRICA, 607
HEALTH CARE WORKERS HAVE BEEN
INFECTED, AND 341 HAVE DIED
SINCE THE OUTBREAK BEGAN IN
MARCH.
HERE IN NEW YORK, POLICE ARE
BRACING FOR A FOURTH NIGHT OF
PROTESTS SINCE THE GRAND JURY
ANNOUNCED IT WOULD NOT INDICT
THE OFFICER WHO KILLED ERIC
GARNER.
MOST OF THE PROTESTS HAVE BEEN
PEACEFUL, BUT THE N.Y.P.D. DID
ARREST ABOUT 20 PEOPLE LAST
NIGHT FOR BEING DISORDERLY AND
BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
MEANTIME, MORE PROTESTS ARE
EXPECTED FOLLOWING TODAY'S
FUNERAL FOR ANOTHER PERSON
KILLED BY POLICE.
AN OFFICER SHOT AN UNARMED BLACK
MAN NAMED AKAI GURLEY IN A
BROOKLYN HOUSING COMPLEX LAST
MONTH.
POLICE CHIEF BILL BRATTON SAYS
THE OFFICER ACCIDENTALLY
DISCHARGED HIS GUN.
THE BROOKLYN D.A. IS CONVENING A
GRAND JURY IN THE CASE.
ON THE WEST COAST, EXPERTS SAY
CALIFORNIA IS IN THE MIDST OF
THE MOST SEVERE THREE-YEAR
DROUGHT IN THE LAST 1,200 YEARS.
RESEARCHERS REPORT IN THE
"AMERICAN GEOPHYSICAL UNION
JOURNAL" THAT WHILE OTHER THREE-
YEAR PERIODS HAVE BEEN DRY, THE
CURRENT DROUGHT IS WORSE BECAUSE
OF THE COMBINATION OF UNUSUALLY
LOW RAINFALL AND RECORD-HIGH
TEMPERATURES.
ALSO IN CALIFORNIA TONIGHT, SO-
CALLED "WILDLIFE KILLING
CONTESTS" HAVE BEEN BANNED.
THE CALIFORNIA FISH AND GAME
COMMISSION APPROVED THE
UNPRECEDENTED BAN ON HUNTING
DERBIES THIS WEEK.
NOW, HUNTERS CAN NO LONGER
COMPETE TO KILL THE MOST
COYOTES, FOXES, BOBCATS,
RACCOONS OR BADGERS TO WIN
PRIZES.
A CONSERVATIONIST GROUP PUSHED
FOR THE BAN AFTER FINDING SOME
PROTECTED SPECIES WERE GETTING
KILLED IN THE CONTESTS.
CALIFORNIA IS THE FIRST STATE TO
IMPOSE SUCH A BAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NATION HAS
BEEN FOCUSED ON STATEN ISLAND,
FERGUSON AND CLEVELAND IN THE
LAST FEW WEEKS AS CITIZENS AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSESS HOW THEY
HAVE AND HOW THEY SHOULD DEAL
WITH ONE ANOTHER.
THIS AS A NEW INVESTIGATION BY
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REVEALS THAT ACCOUNTING FOR
KILLINGS BY POLICE MAY BE
GROSSLY UNDERESTIMATED.
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
ROB BARRY JOINS US NOW.
SO, HOW DID YOU DO YOUR
REPORTING AND WHAT DID YOU FIND?
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
WHAT WE DID WAS WE ASKED ABOUT
105 DEPARTMENTS TO GIVE US THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
KILLED OVER A FIVE- OR SIX-YEAR
PERIOD, AND WE COMPARED THOSE
NUMBERS TO WHAT HAD BEEN
REPORTED TO THE F.B.I.
AND WE FOUND THAT THERE WAS A
LOT OF STUFF THAT WASN'T IN THE
F.B.I.'S INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID THAT AT
LEAST 550 POLICE KILLINGS
BETWEEN 2007 AND 2012 NEVER MADE
IT ON TO THE BOOKS?
>> YEAH, AND THAT'S ONLY AMONG
THE TOP 105, 110 LARGEST
AGENCIES IN THE COUNTRY.
SO THERE ARE 18,000
JURISDICTIONS, SO, YOU KNOW,
THAT'S JUST A SMALL ESTIMATE OF
THE TOTAL.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, SO, FOR
EXAMPLE, SOME JURISDICTIONS
COULD CALL SOMETHING A
JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE VERSUS AN
UNJUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE,
DISCREPANCIES IN DEFINITIONS?
WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
>> IT WAS A WIDE RANGE OF
THINGS.
THAT WAS CERTAINLY ONE OF THE
ISSUES.
WHAT WE'RE DEALING WITH HERE IS
WHAT ARE ESSENTIALLY CRIME
REPORTS, AND AGENCIES WHO ARE
FORCED TO REPORT INFORMATION
ABOUT UNFORTUNATE EVENTS WHERE
OFFICERS TAKE SOMEONE'S LIFE,
THEY DON'T REALLY WANT TO
INCLUDE THAT IN A CRIME REPORT.
YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT A CRIME IN
THEIR EYES.
IT WAS A JUSTIFIABLE EVENT.
SO THERE WAS SOME CONCERN BY
SOME AGENCIES ABOUT THAT ISSUE.
THERE'S ALSO A LOT OF OTHER
ISSUES INVOLVED.
YOU HAD TECHNICAL ISSUES.
SO YOU HAD DEPARTMENTS WHICH,
YOU KNOW, AT LEAST THEY TOLD US
THEY THOUGHT THAT THESE THINGS
WERE BEING REPORTED.
THEY THOUGHT THEY WERE
PARTICIPATING IN THIS PROGRAM.
BUT WHEN THEY WENT AND LOOKED
INTO THIS, WHEN WE SAID, "HEY,
HERE ARE THE NUMBERS YOU
REPORTED," MAYBE THERE WOULD BE
ONE AND THEY TOLD US TEN.
THEY LOOKED INTO IT AND SAID IT
TURNS OUT WE HAVEN'T BEEN KEYING
IT IN CORRECTLY.
SO, THAT WAS ANOTHER ISSUE.
I THINK THE LARGEST ISSUE WAS
THAT THREE OF THE BIGGEST STATES
IN THE COUNTRY-- NEW YORK,
FLORIDA AND ILLINOIS-- HAVE
ALMOST NOTHING REPORTED, AND
THAT'S BECAUSE OF THE WAY THIS
PROCESS WORKS.
WHAT HAPPENS IS THAT WHEN AN
AGENCY WANTS TO SEND THIS
INFORMATION TO THE F.B.I., THEY
PASS IT THROUGH A STATE AGENCY
FIRST.
AND IN ALL THREE OF THOSE
STATES' CASES, THERE ARE ISSUES,
VARYING ISSUES WITH THE WAY THE
STATES THEN TURN AND AROUND PASS
UP TO THE F.B.I., SUCH THAT
THERE'S NO INFORMATION ABOUT
JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDES FROM ANY
OF THOSE STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT YOU'RE
ALSO SAYING HERE IS NOT
EVERYBODY HAS TO REPORT.
>> IT'S VOLUNTARILY.
EXACTLY.
AND WHEN YOU'RE DEALING WITH
18,000 LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, YOU KNOW, A
LOT OF THEM SMALL.
A LOT OF THESE AGENCIES ONLY
HAVE, YOU KNOW, FIVE, TEN
OFFICERS AT THEM.
YOU KNOW, THESE EVENTS ARE VERY
RARE.
REPORTING THEM IS JUST NOT BUILT
INTO THEIR PROCESS IN MANY
CASES.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WE'VE GOT
DIFFERING DEFINITIONS.
WE'VE GOT 18,000 JURISDICTIONS.
IT'S ALL VOLUNTARY, AND I'M
ASSUMING SOME OF THESE
DEPARTMENTS ARE PRETTY SENSITIVE
ABOUT THIS INFORMATION IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
>> YEAH, OF COURSE.
I MEAN, EACH OF THESE THINGS ARE
INFLAMMATORY OR POTENTIALLY
INFLAMMATORY EVENTS, SO THERE
WERE CONCERNS-- A LOT OF
DEPARTMENTS ASKED ME, WHEN WE
WENT TO THEM AND SAID, "WILL YOU
PROVIDE US WITH THE NUMBER OF
INCIDENTS YOU HAD," QUITE A FEW
DEPARTMENTS ANSWERED FIRST
SAYING, "WHY?
YES, WE'LL GIVE IT TO YOU, BUT
JUST TELL US WHY YOU WANT THIS."
THERE IS A LOT OF CONCERN ABOUT
IT BEING USED FOR COMPARISONS.
WHEN WE SEE WHAT'S HAPPENING
ACROSS THE COUNTRY RIGHT NOW I
THINK YOU CAN UNDERSTAND THAT
CONCERN.
>> Sreenivasan: YOUR REPORTING
IS NOT SAYING ALL COPS ARE BAD.
YOU'RE JUST POINTING OUT THERE'S
A DISCREPANCY IN HOW WE'RE
REPORTING THE INFORMATION.
IF THERE ARE GAPS IN THE DATA
SET, HOW TO WE MAKE ANY POLICY
BASED ON FAULTY NUMBERS?
>> THAT'S A GREAT POINT, AND
THAT'S WHY WE WERE LOOKING AT
THIS IN THE FIRST PLACE.
WE WANTED TO GET A BENCHMARK.
WE WANTED TO KNOW HOW OFTEN
DOES THIS HAPPEN AND WHO DOES IT
HAPPEN TO?
WHEN WE TRIED TO DO THAT USING
THE AVAILABLE INFORMATION AND
TOOK IT TO EXPERTS, EVERYONE
SAID, "WELL, YOU CAN'T REALLY DO
THAT," AND WE SAID OKAY.
AND THAT RAISED THE QUESTION OF
WHY NOT?
IN TERMS OF SOLUTIONS, AS TO
WHAT WE WOULD DO FROM HERE, IT'S
A COMPLICATED PROBLEM, AND WE
DISCUSSED MOST OF THE REASONS
WHY.
SOME-- SOME OF THE PEOPLE
INVOLVED IN THIS ARE WORKING NOW
TOWARDS COMING UP WITH
INCENTIVES, FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR
SOME SORT OF MANDATORY PROCESS
THAT WOULD REQUIRE THESE THINGS
TO BE REPORTED.
BUT FROM WHAT I'VE BEEN ABLE TO
TELL AT THIS POINT THERE'S
NOTHING CONCRETE ON THE WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, ROB
BARRY FROM THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
THERE ARE NEARLY FOUR BILLION
REGISTERED EMAIL ACCOUNTS AND
MORE THAN A BILLION FACEBOOK
ACCOUNTS AROUND THE WORLD.
IN THE U.S. ALONE, ACCORDING TO
ONE STUDY, NEARLY HALF OF ALL
BILLS ARE PAID ONLINE.
AND AS YOU'LL SEE IN THIS
UPDATED STORY, UNTANGLING ALL OF
THAT VALUABLE ELECTRONIC
INFORMATION AFTER WE'RE GONE IS
BECOMING INCREASINGLY
COMPLICATED.
>> Reporter: DO YOU HAVE AN
EMAIL ACCOUNT?
HOW ABOUT A FACEBOOK PAGE?
DO YOU BANK ONLINE?
SHOP ONLINE?
PAY YOUR GAS, LIGHT, OR CABLE TV
BILL OVER THE INTERNET?
I'VE JUST LAID OUT MORE THAN A
HALF DOZEN ACCOUNTS THAT MANY OF
US HAVE, LIKELY EACH WITH ITS
OWN PASSWORD.
THESE ACCOUNTS DON'T DIE WITH
US.
THE PASSWORDS TO EACH OF THEM
ARE OFTEN TIMES LOCKED AWAY WITH
ONLY ONE PERSON, THE DECEASED.
WHICH MEANS THAT VALUABLE ONLINE
ASSETS COULD BE LOST FOREVER OR
BE FOUND BY THOSE LOOKING TO
EXPLOIT THEM.
TAKE THE CASE OF GLENN
WILLIAMSON, A TECH ENTREPRENEUR
IN PORTLAND, OREGON.
TWO YEARS AGO, HE GOT THE WORST
NEWS POSSIBLE.
>> I WAS IN THE PHILIPPINES
SPEAKING AT A CONFERENCE, AND
WHEN YOUR PHONE GOES OFF 15
TIMES AND IT'S 3:00 IN THE
MORNING IN THE UNITED STATES,
YOU HAVE A BAD FEELING.
YOU KNOW IT'S NOT A GOOD CALL.
>> Reporter: GLENN'S 73-YEAR-OLD
MOTHER, LEE, HAD DIED.
AS HER FIDUCIARY AND AS A 25-
YEAR VETERAN OF THE TECH WORLD,
IT FELL TO HIM TO MANAGE HER
ONLINE ACCOUNTS.
>> I KNEW MY MOM, BEING A COOL
GRANDMA, WAS ON TWITTER.
SO, I KNEW SHE WAS ON TWITTER
AND I KNEW SHE HAD A YAHOO
ACCOUNT, SO WE HAD A BASELINE TO
START, BUT THAT'S ALL WE KNEW.
>> Reporter: AFTER 20 HOURS OF
SEARCHING, GLENN FOUND 13
DIFFERENT ACCOUNTS BELONGING TO
HIS MOTHER, INCLUDING EMAIL,
SOCIAL MEDIA AND SHOPPING
ACCOUNTS.
>> SO WE BROKE IT DOWN INTO
CATEGORIES-- TRAVEL, SENTIMENTAL
VALUE, SECURITY-- AND BASICALLY
WE SEARCHED ON ABOUT 75
DIFFERENT SITES.
>> Reporter: SOME HAD REAL
VALUE.
>> SO, AFTER GOING THROUGH ALL
THE AIRLINES, WE GOT TO UNITED,
AND UNITED DID INDEED HAVE MY
MOM AS A CUSTOMER.
AND THERE WAS 54,000 MILES THAT
WE WERE ABLE TO RETRIEVE FOR OUR
FAMILY.
>> Reporter: ALL THIS WHILE HE
WAS GRIEVING.
>> AND IT'S A PAINFUL... IT'S A
LONG PROCESS, AND EVERYBODY
MEANS WELL, BUT IF ONE MORE
PERSON TELLS YOU THEY'RE SORRY,
IT'S LIKE, "OKAY, I JUST NEED TO
KNOW, DID SHE HAVE AN ACCOUNT OR
NOT."
>> Reporter: WILLIAMSON AND HIS
WIFE ARE ONLINE SAVVY,
RELATIVELY YOUNG, AND IT WAS
STILL TOUGH TO FIND ALL THOSE
ACCOUNTS.
>> SO, THE AVERAGE PERSON,
ESPECIALLY IF THE AVERAGE PERSON
IS DOING IT IN THEIR 60s, IT'S A
VERY, VERY DIFFICULT PROCESS.
>> Reporter: GLENN'S PROBLEMS
MANAGING HIS MOTHER'S ONLINE
ESTATE HELPED INSPIRE HIM TO
START A BUSINESS SOLUTION CALLED
"WEBCEASE," AN ONLINE SERVICE
THAT HELPS PEOPLE SEARCH FOR
THEIR DECEASED LOVED ONES'
DIGITAL ASSETS.
IT USES A PERSON'S BASIC
INFORMATION, LIKE AN EMAIL
ADDRESS, AND FINDS THE MAJOR
ONLINE ACCOUNTS THAT ARE LINKED
TO IT.
AND ALTHOUGH WEBCEASE WON'T SHUT
DOWN AN ACCOUNT FOR YOU, IT WILL
TELL YOU WHAT CAN BE DONE UNDER
A WEB SITE'S SPECIFIC TERMS OF
SERVICE.
>> MY MOM HAD AN ASSET INVENTORY
OF HER FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS.
BUT SHE DIDN'T HAVE AN ASSET
INVENTORY OF ALL THINGS DIGITAL,
AND THAT'S REALLY WHAT WE
PROVIDE TO THE FAMILY, IS WE
PROVIDE THEM AT A HIGH LEVEL A
DIGITAL ASSET INVENTORY.
SO, YOU CAN LOOK THROUGH IT AND
SAY, "OH, MY MOM WAS ON AMAZON
AND iTUNES, AND SHE HAD MARRIOTT
AND HYATT, ET CETERA."
SO, THAT'S REALLY THE VALUE WE
PROVIDE.
>> Reporter: WEBCEASE IS ONE OF
A HANDFUL OF WEB SITES THAT HAS
SPRUNG UP OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS-- SITES LIKE NAVIGATR, THE
DOC SAFE, CAPSOOLE, MY CYBER
SAFE AND AFTERNOTE-- ALL OF THEM
TRYING TO TACKLE WHAT IS
BECOMING AN INCREASINGLY COMMON
PROBLEM.
>> NOWADAYS, EVERYONE KEEPS
THEIR FILING CABINETS ON THEIR
COMPUTERS, AND THEY MAY NOT HAVE
SHARED THE ACCESS TO THAT WITH
THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Reporter: SUZANNE WALSH IS AN
ESTATE LAWYER IN WEST HARTFORD,
CONNECTICUT.
>> I HAVE RECEIVED PANICKED
CALLS FROM FAMILY MEMBERS WHO
DON'T KNOW PASSWORDS, DON'T KNOW
THE NATURE OF THE ONLINE
ACCOUNTS.
THEY SIMPLY KNOW MOM PAID THE
BILLS ONLINE, AND THEY MAY NOT
EVEN BE SURE ABOUT THE BANK.
>> Reporter: WALSH SAYS THAT THE
MAIN PROBLEM IS ONE OF ACCESS.
IN MANY CASES, WE HAVE MADE IT
VIRTUALLY ILLEGAL FOR ANYONE
ELSE TO USE OUR ONLINE ACCOUNTS.
IT STARTS WITH THOSE TERMS OF
SERVICE AGREEMENTS, THE FINE
PRINT OF THE ONLINE WORLD.
ONCE THE "I AGREE" BUTTON IS
PRESSED, IT'S AS GOOD AS A
CONTRACT.
>> MANY OF THEM PROHIBIT THE
SHARING OF PASSWORDS, AND THEY
PROHIBIT THIRD-PARTY ACCESS.
SO, RIGHT NOW, THEY TEND TO BAR
ANYBODY BUT THE ACCOUNT HOLDER
ACCESSING THE ACCOUNT.
>> Reporter: THAT MEANS EVEN IF
THE ACCOUNT HOLDER IS DEAD.
INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS SAY
THEY'RE FOLLOWING THE LETTER OF
THE LAW AS SPELLED OUT IN THE
1986 STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT,
WHICH PROHIBITS ANYONE FROM
ACCESSING PRIVATE INFORMATION
ONLINE WITHOUT PERMISSION.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH FIDUCIARY
ACCESS NOW IS THAT IT MAY BE A
VIOLATION OF FEDERAL PRIVACY LAW
OR A COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE
ACT.
IT MAY BE AN ACTUAL CRIMINAL ACT
TO VIOLATE THE TERMS OF SERVICE
AGREEMENT.
>> Reporter: BUT BEING UNABLE TO
ACCESS OR SHUT DOWN A DECEASED
LOVED ONE'S ACCOUNTS COULD HAVE
UNFORESEEN RISKS, AS GLENN
WILLIAMSON, WHO SPENT 20 YEARS
IN ONLINE SECURITY, WILL TELL
YOU.
>> THE YEAR AFTER SOMEBODY
PASSES IS ONE OF THE MOST
VULNERABLE TIMES FOR IDENTITY
THEFT.
IT'S A HEINOUS CRIME, BUT WHAT
THE BAD GUYS DO, BECAUSE DEATH
IS PUBLIC RECORD, THEY'LL GO OUT
THERE AND THEY'LL COMB THROUGH
RECENTLY DECEASED AND THEY'LL
CREATE A FAKE IDENTITY BECAUSE
THE DECEASED DON'T CHECK EMAILS
AND THEY DON'T GET THE MAIL.
>> Reporter: EVERY YEAR, MORE
THAN TWO MILLION AMERICANS ARE
THE POSTHUMOUS VICTIMS OF
IDENTITY FRAUD.
THIEVES CAN USE A DEAD PERSON'S
INFORMATION TO RACK UP CREDIT
CARD CHARGES, APPLY FOR LOANS OR
EVEN FILE FALSE TAX RETURNS.
AND MUCH OF THIS INFORMATION CAN
BE FOUND ON THE INTERNET THROUGH
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE AS A
SHOPPING ACCOUNT.
TO DATE, ONLY SEVEN STATES HAVE
ANY LAWS IN EFFECT THAT GOVERN
ONLINE ESTATE PLANNING.
SUZANNE WALSH, WHO CHAIRS A
COMMITTEE ON THE UNIFORM LAW
COMMISSION, AN ORGANIZATION
WHICH DRAFTS LAWS WHICH IT HOPES
TO STANDARDIZE IN ALL 50 STATES,
IS HOPING TO CHANGE THAT.
OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS, WALSH'S
COMMITTEE HAS BEEN DRAFTING THE
FIDUCIARY ACCESS TO DIGITAL
ASSETS ACT, WHICH WOULD GIVE
FIDUCIARIES THE SAME RIGHTS OVER
ONLINE ESTATES AS THEY NOW HAVE
OVER PHYSICAL ESTATES.
>> FIDUCIARIES, TRADITIONALLY,
HAVE ACCESS TO EVERYTHING IN
ADMIN... ESPECIALLY IN
ADMINISTERING ESTATES.
AND THAT USED TO MEAN OPENING UP
THE MAILBOX, OPENING UP THE FILE
CABINET, RIFLING THROUGH THE
DESK.
OUR ACT IS DESIGNED TO CONTINUE
THAT AND FACILITATE THAT, GIVEN
THE DIFFERENT NATURE OF THE
DIGITAL ASSETS.
>> Reporter: THE BILL WAS
REVIEWED AND ENACTED BY THE
UNIFORM LAW COMMISSION THIS PAST
JULY.
BUT IT'S STILL UP TO INDIVIDUAL
STATE LEGISLATURES TO PROPOSE IT
AND PASS IT AS LAW.
AS OF NOW, ONLY ONE STATE,
DELAWARE, HAS SIGNED THE ACT
INTO LAW.
EVEN SO, THE NEW LAW HAS FACED
OPPOSITION.
THE GENERAL COUNSEL OF A
WASHINGTON, D.C.-BASED GROUP
CALLED THE STATE PRIVACY AND
SECURITY COALITION, WHICH
REPRESENTS THE INTERESTS OF
GOOGLE, YAHOO AND FACEBOOK,
AMONG OTHERS, HAS COME OUT
AGAINST THE BILL SAYING, "THIS
LAW TAKES NO ACCOUNT OF
MINIMIZING INTRUSIONS INTO THE
PRIVACY OF THIRD PARTIES WHO
COMMUNICATED WITH THE DECEASED.
THIS WOULD INCLUDE HIGHLY
CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS TO
DECEDENTS FROM THIRD PARTIES WHO
ARE STILL ALIVE, WHO WOULD BE
VERY SURPRISED THAT AN EXECUTOR
IS REVIEWING THE
COMMUNICATIONS."
BUT, DESPITE THE PUSHBACK,
SUZANNE WALSH IS HOPEFUL THAT
HER COMMITTEE'S WORK WILL BE
RECOGNIZED IN MORE STATE
LEGISLATURES.
>> WIDESPREAD ENACTMENT IS OUR
GOAL.
THAT'S OUR PRIMARY GOAL.
CERTAINLY WE HOPE AND EXPECT
THAT IT WON'T TAKE MORE THAN A
YEAR OR TWO FOR MOST OF THE
STATES TO ADOPT THIS PRODUCT.
>> Reporter: FOR NOW, THERE ARE
STEPS THAT PEOPLE CAN TAKE
TO MAKE THE PROCESS OF DIGITAL
ESTATE MANAGEMENT EASIER ON NEXT
OF KIN.
FIRST, CREATE AN INVENTORY LIST
OF ALL YOUR ONLINE ACCOUNTS AND
PASSWORDS FOR YOUR FIDUCIARY.
STIPULATE WHAT TO DO WITH YOUR
EMAIL ACCOUNTS IN A WILL, AND
READ THE TERMS OF SERVICE
AGREEMENTS SO YOU CAN
UNDERSTAND HOW OR EVEN IF
ACCESS TO YOUR ACCOUNTS CAN BE
GRANTED TO SOMEONE ELSE.
BUT GLENN WILLIAMSON SAYS, NO
MATTER WHAT STEPS YOU TAKE OR
WHAT LAWS ARE EVENTUALLY PASSED,
MANAGING A DIGITAL ESTATE FOR A
LOVED ONE WILL ALWAYS BE A LONG,
ARDUOUS AND PAINFUL PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: TO LEARN HOW TO
BETTER MANAGE YOUR OWN DIGITAL
ESTATE, VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY
TONIGHT, PRESIDENT OBAMA, WHO
WAS SUFFERING FROM A SORE THROAT
FOR THE PAST COUPLE OF WEEKS,
HAD A CT SCAN AT WALTER REED
MILITARY HOSPITAL TODAY.
THE CT SCAN CAME BACK NORMAL.
DOCTORS SAY HIS SYMPTOMS ARE
RELATED TO ACID REFLUX, A
CONDITION THAT AFFECTS ONE IN
FIVE U.S. ADULTS.
NEW RESEARCH SHOWS GIRAFFES ARE
SLOWLY HEADING TOWARD
EXTINCTION.
POACHING AND HUMAN POPULATION
GROWTH HAVE REPORTEDLY REDUCED
THE AFRICAN GIRAFFE POPULATION
BY 40% OVER THE PAST 15 YEARS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.